

The imperative paradigm is also known as an algorithmic paradigm. In the imperative paradigm, a program consists of data and an algorithm (sequence of commands) that manipulates the data. The data at a particular point in time defines the state of the program. The state of the program changes as the commands are executed in a specific sequence. The data is stored in memory. 

Imperative programming languages provide:
- **Variables** to refer to the memory locations.
- **Assignment operations** to change the value of a variable.
- Other constructs to control the flow of a program.

In imperative programming, you need to specify the steps to solve a problem.

### Example: Adding 10 to 15

Suppose you have an integer, say `15`, and you want to add `10` to it. Your approach would be to add `1` to `15` ten times, and you get the result, `25`. You can write a program using an imperative language to add `10` to `15`, as follows. Note that you do not need to understand the syntax of the following code. Just try to get a feel for it:

```c
int num = 15; // num holds 15 at this point
int counter = 0; // counter holds 0 at this point
while (counter < 10) {
    num = num + 1; // Modifying data in num
    counter = counter + 1; // Modifying data in counter
}
// num holds 25 at this point

```


The first two lines are variable declarations that represent the **data part** of the program. The `while` loop represents the **algorithm part** of the program that operates on the data. The code inside the `while` loop is executed ten times. The loop increments the data stored in the `num` variable by `1` in each iteration. When the loop ends, it has incremented the value of `num` by `10`.

### Key Characteristics of Imperative Programming:

- **Data** in imperative programming is transient.
- The **algorithm** is permanent.

### Examples of Imperative Languages:

- FORTRAN
- COBOL
- C