
# Procedural Paradigm 
The procedural paradigm is similar to the imperative paradigm with one difference: it combines multiple commands in a unit called a **procedure**. A procedure is executed as a unit. Executing the commands contained in a procedure is known as **calling** or **invoking** the procedure.   A program in a procedural language consists of: - **Data** - A sequence of **procedure calls** that manipulate the data. 
### Example: Procedure `addTen` 
The following piece of code demonstrates a typical procedure named `addTen`: 

```c 
void addTen(int num) {     
int counter = 0;     
while (counter < 10) {         
	num = num + 1; // Modifying data in num         
	counter = counter + 1;  // Modifying data in counter     }     
							// num has been incremented by 10 }
```


The `addTen` procedure uses a placeholder (also known as a **parameter**) `num`, which is supplied at the time of its execution. The code ignores the actual value of `num`. It simply adds `10` to the current value of `num`.

### Example: Calling the `addTen` Procedure

To add `10` to `15` using the `addTen` procedure, you can use the following code:


```c
int x = 15; // x holds 15 at this point 
addTen(x);  // Call addTen procedure that will increment x by 10 
			// x holds 25 at this point
```


### Key Observations:

- The code in the **imperative paradigm** and that in the **procedural paradigm** are similar in structure.
- Using **procedures** results in:
    - Modular code.
    - Increased reusability of algorithms.

### Relationship Between Imperative and Procedural Paradigms:

- Some people treat the imperative and procedural paradigms as the same.
- However, the procedural paradigm builds on the imperative paradigm by abstracting sequences of commands into procedures.
- The **unit of programming** in the procedural paradigm is a sequence of procedures rather than individual commands.

### Characteristics of Procedures:

- A procedure has **side effects**: It modifies the data part of the program as it executes its logic.

### Examples of Procedural Programming Languages:

- C
- C++
- Java
- COBOL