
The functional paradigm is based on the concept of **mathematical functions**. A function can be thought of as an **algorithm** that computes a value from some given inputs. Unlike a procedure in procedural programming, a function does **not have side effects**. 

### Key Characteristics of Functional Programming

1. **Immutability**: 
   - Values are immutable; a new value is derived by applying a function to the input value.
   - The input value does not change.

2. **No Variables or Assignments**:
   - Functional programming avoids variables and assignments, which are used for modifying data in imperative programming.

3. **Recursion**:
   - Repeated tasks are performed using **recursion**, not loops (e.g., `while` or `for` loops).
   - A recursive function is defined in terms of itself, performing work and then calling itself.

### Example: Recursive Function `add`

A function, `add`, that can add an integer `n` to another integer `x` using recursion can be defined as follows:

```c
int add(x, n) {
    if (n == 0) {
        return x;
    } else {
        return 1 + add(x, n - 1); // Apply the add function recursively
    }
}
```

In this example:

- The `add` function does not use any variables or modify any data.
- It computes the result by recursively calling itself.

You can call the `add` function to add `10` to `15` as follows:

```c
add(15, 10); // Results in 25

```


### Deterministic Functions

- A function always produces the **same output** when applied to the **same input**.

### Examples of Functional Programming Languages

- **Haskell**
- **Erlang**
- **Scala**

### Functional Programming in Java

- Starting with **Java SE 8**, a new language construct called **lambda expressions** allows you to write functional programming–style code in Java.

#### Tip

Lambda expressions enable concise function definitions and encourage the use of functional constructs in imperative languages like Java.